First version of entity auditing api (#20)
intelie/gitbook-platform: developers/backend-api/entity-audit.md

# Entity Audit

> An **Entity Audit** represents a write operation of an **Live** entity that was listened by a Hibernate Listener and transformed into a new entity called `EntityAudit` about this operation and the new state of the entity in the system.

Author: Good suggestions

> Live supports storing an `EntityAudit` in two forms: a _database record_ and/or an _event_ depending on the configuration set in the general system settings.

Author: That is the spot where I would like to add the image of the configuration card. Do you think we should change the text? I am trying to avoid being repetitive.

> Live supports storing an `EntityAudit` in two forms: a _database record_ and/or an _event_ depending on the configuration set in the general system settings.

Reviewer: I think it's a good idea for you to reference the image in the text, and leave a placeholder. This way, it will be easier to add the image later.

> Live supports storing an `EntityAudit` in two forms: a _database record_ and/or an _event_ depending on the configuration set in the general system settings.

Author: I asked in the Backend chapter meeting if anyone has ever done this and some people suggested referencing the image directly from the `.gitbook/assets` folder.

{% hint style="info" %} By default this feature is disabled. {% endhint %}

## Entities available to audit

There are some rules to an entity to be available to audit. The `EntityAuditListener` is the base class of the listeners and apply some filters before audit a entity like:

- *The entity should not be annotated with `@IgnoreAudit`*. This annotation was created to mark entities that should be ignored by these audit listeners, e.g. `DashboardUserViewCount`.

> - *The entity should not come from a call skipping audit*. This is used when the client calls the API method `Live.data().installEntities()` flagging to avoid auditing entities in an bulk entity creation.

Author: good catch

- *The entity should not be a Setting nor a SettingLog*. This classes have a separate business logic and could possibly generate a deadlock at this point.

{% hint style="warning" %} **Delete operations do not store the complete content** of the entity due to a technical reason. In delete operations the Hibernate Listener can no longer have access to a relationship of the target entity. Another point is that this operation do not change the last version of the content being deleted and therefore would be a resource waste. {% endhint %}

## Using audit as versioning

> As said before, if the feature is enabled in the system configurations, the write operations of entities will be stored containing the current version of the entity in json format, e.g. the `Plugin` entity:

Author: Starting a sentence with "E.g." seems to be wrong to me. Are you sure about that?

```java
@Entity
@Table(name = "plugin")
public class Plugin implements HasUpdateInfo {

    @Id
    @GeneratedValue(strategy = GenerationType.IDENTITY)
    @Column(name = "plugin_id")
    private Integer id;

    @Column
    private String name;

    @Column
    private String version;

    @Column
    private String relativePath;

    @Column
    private String sha;

    @Column
    private boolean active;

    @ManyToOne
    @NotFound(action = NotFoundAction.IGNORE)
    @JoinColumn(name = "author_user_id")
    protected User author;

    @ManyToOne
    @NotFound(action = NotFoundAction.IGNORE)
    @JoinColumn(name = "last_modification_author_user_id")
    protected User lastModificationAuthor;

    @Column(name = "date_created")
    private Long dateCreated;

    @Column(name = "date_modified")
    private Long dateModified;
...
```

will have a serialized value in json format of an `EntityAudit`

```json
{"plugin_id":73,"name":"plugin-oauth2","version":"4.0.0-SNAPSHOT","relativePath":"runtime/plugins/plugin-oauth2-4.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar","sha":"521106f069e19cb655584fde535f94ea61de0c25","active":true,"date_created":1681149907570,"date_modified":1685978338791}
```

> With this information in hand, it is possible to list the different versions of an entity's field (or all fields) and return to a past value.

Author: What do you think of: 
```suggestion
With this information in hand, it is possible to list the different versions of an entity's field (or all fields) and roll it back to a previous version.
```

I am testing the suggestion here, but the change was: ... , and roll it back to a **previous** version.

{% hint style="info" %} Most entities will have all its fields parsed to json, but in some cases, e.g. `User`, this can not be done caused by logic or security reasons like the password field that could change the user's password.  {% endhint %}

### EntityAudit as an event

The `EntityAudits` can be listed as events querying by *type* `__audit` and *src* `core`

> ### EntityAudit as an database record

Reviewer: EntityAudit as **a** database record

The `EntityAudits` stored as database records can be listed using the endpoints provided by the service `EntityAuditResource` available via `/rest/entity-audit`. There are three endpoints currently available:

#### List EntityAudit by type

> This endpoint lists all `EntityAudits` of a specific entity, e.g. `{base-Url}/rest/entity-audit/list/perspective` will return a list of `EntityAudits` of the entity `Perspective`.

Reviewer: ...a specific entity**.** E.g. ...

Author: Again, starting a sentence with "E.g." seems to be wrong to me. Are you sure about that?

Reviewer: You are right. It's ok as it is.

#### List EntityAudit by type and id

> This endpoint lists all `EntityAudits` of a specific entity identified by *id*, e.g. `{base-Url}/rest/entity-audit/list/perspective/8` will return a list of `EntityAudits` of the entity `Perspective` having the *id* field 8.

Reviewer: ... identified by *id*. E.g. ...

Author: Again, starting a sentence with "E.g." seems to be wrong to me. Are you sure about that?

#### Get EntityAudit content

> This endpoint retrieves the entity content from a `EntityAudit`. It is used to obtain the entity stored by a `EntityAudit`, e.g. `{base-Url}/rest/entity-audit/100` will return the entity content of the `EntityAudit` with *id* 100. This method in intended to be used after the client have already chosen the specific `EntityAudit` containing the desired entity content.

Reviewer: ... stored by a `EntityAudit`**.** E.g. ...

Author: Again, starting a sentence with "E.g." seems to be wrong to me. Are you sure about that?

> {% hint style="warning" %} Get an EntityAudit representing a delete operation will return a BAD_REQUEST. As explained before EntityAudits of delete operations do not hold an entity content {% endhint %}

Reviewer: **Getting** an EntityAudit **that represents** a delete operation will return a BAD_REQUEST. As explained before**,** EntityAudits of delete operations do not hold an entity content.

> {% hint style="warning" %} Get an EntityAudit representing a delete operation will return a BAD_REQUEST. As explained before EntityAudits of delete operations do not hold an entity content {% endhint %}

Reviewer: I think It's worth to include a paragraph explaining the steps needed to rollback an entity state.

Author: Well, we showed how to get an older version of an entity. It seems to me to be clear enough that the client should save the new state if he wants it. Do you think that can be a misunderstanding with it?

Reviewer: Just a short sentence saying that he can use that older entity, and call a save on the related resource, if he wants to rollback the state.

Author: Fair enough. What do you think of: ``` If it were the case, the user can use the result of this method to roll back parts or all of the current version of an entity.```?

Reviewer: If **needed**, the user can use the result of this method to roll back parts or all of the current version of an entity **by calling the save method on the related resource class.**

# Entity Audit

An **Entity Audit** represents a write operation on a **Live** entity, that was captured by a Hibernate Listener, and transformed into a new entity called `EntityAudit`. This new entity stores details of the operation and the new state of the entity in the system.

Live supports storing an `EntityAudit` in two forms: a _database record_ and/or an _event_ depending on the configuration set in the general system settings.

> ![configuration image](<../.gitbook/assets/entity_audit_config.png>) 

Reviewer 2: Maybe  `![configuration image](<../../.gitbook/assets/entity_audit_config.png>)`?

Author: Yes. Good catch! There is one more level
